text/0000-use-isolation.md, before:

- Start Date: 2023-12-13
- RFC PR: (leave this empty)
- React Issue: (leave this empty)

# Summary

This RFC proposes a new hook `useIsolation(() => …)` to allow creating a _sub-hook_ that can compute expensive values in _isolation_ and can memoize its returned value.

# Basic example

Let’s say you have a context that is a bit massive, but you just want to listen to 1 value `foo` in it and only re-render when it changes, you could do something like this:

```jsx
const MyComponent = () => {
  const foo = React.useIsolation(() => {
    const context = React.useContext(CustomHeavyContext);
    return context.foo;
  });
};
```

But this would also work with any kind of state / values:

```jsx
const MyComponent = () => {
  const bar = React.useIsolation(() => {
    const allSearchParams = useSearchParams();
    return allSearchParams.get("bar");
  });
};
```

# Motivation

This topic is mostly for performance reasons. A few of other RFCs are proposing solutions to solve this:

- `useIsolation` in https://github.com/reactjs/rfcs/issues/168,
- `useContextSelector` in https://github.com/reactjs/rfcs/pull/119.

When working with components, you can bail out of re-renders with `React.memo` / `shouldComponentUpdate()`.

And given this tree: `<A><B/></A>`, when `A` changes, `B` may not rerender.<br>
But when working with hooks, if you have 2 hooks `useA` and `useB` (used within `useA`), when `useB` re-renders, there is no way to bail out from its renders in neither `useA`.

This is an issue for large codebases that can share a lot of hooks (without having the ability of auditing all of them).<br>
Or for libraries like `react-router-dom` that expose large objects (the router state) and where users want to only register for changes that matter to them.

# Detailed design

This hook is inspired by both `React.memo` where you can provide a `areEqual` function as a 2nd parameter, and by `useMemo`.

When you want to make a piece of code run in _isolation\*_ from its parent component/hook, you can use `useIsolation`.<br>
This hook takes 2 parameters:

- Using MDN’s notation: `useIsolation(callback, [deps])`
- Using TS’s notation: `useIsolation<T>(callback: () => T, deps?: ReadonlyArray<unknown>)`

\*: this wouldn’t strictly run in isolation, as you may define dependencies to ease the communication between the parent scope and the isolated one.

## Pseudo-code mechanism

The way this would work in pseudo-code is this way:

> [!WARNING]
> I don’t know React internals so I’m going to make some assumptions

1. During the initial mount, call the `callback` within its _parent scope_
2. Create a new internal _call scope_ (like a component)
3. If the `callback` uses hooks like `useState`, `useContext`, etc., bind them to this _call scope_ instead of its parent scope
4. If there are dependencies defined, store then in _internal slots_ (like like with `useMemo` or `useCallback`) saved on the _parent scope_
5. Store the return value of the `callback` in a _internal slot_ in the _parent scope_
6. If there are any updates in any of the hooks defined within the _call scope_ (aka within the `callback`), re-compute the `callback`, and store the return value in same _internal slot_.
7. If there are any updates in the _parent scope_, check if any dependencies have changed (if no dependencies are set, recompute on all updates), re-compute the `callback`, and store the return value in same _internal slot_.

## Details on the design

As this can accept optional dependencies, the question of "what to do if there is an update in the parent component/hook?" should be tackled.

This hook would work like any other hook and follow the rule of hooks. And as it creates a new _call scope_, this doesn’t break the rule of hooks per say (as sub-hooks would not always be called), as the isolated scope would behave like a sub-component.

This hook should only be available in client components, but not in RSCs.

## Code examples

### Without dependencies

```jsx
const MyComponent = () => {
  const [index, setIndex] = React.useState(0);
  const [other, setOther] = React.useState(0);
  const fooWithIndex = React.useIsolation(function isolated() {
    const context = React.useContext(CustomHeavyContext);
    return context.foo + index;
  });
};
```

With this piece of code,

- if `index` gets updated, `isolated()` will have to be re-computed
- if `other` gets updated, `isolated()` will have to be re-computed
- if `CustomHeavyContext` gets updated, `isolated()` will have to be re-computed

### With dependencies

```jsx
const MyComponent = () => {
  const [index, setIndex] = React.useState(0);
  const [other, setOther] = React.useState(0);
  const fooWithIndex = React.useIsolation(
    function isolated() {
      const context = React.useContext(CustomHeavyContext);
      return context.foo + index;
    },
    [index]
  );
};
```

With this piece of code,

- if `index` gets updated, `isolated()` will have to be re-computed
- if `other` gets updated, `isolated()` **won’t** have to be re-computed
- if `CustomHeavyContext` gets updated, `isolated()` will have to be re-computed

# Drawbacks

The base principle of this new hook is to be able to create new _call scope_ (aka component-like scopes).<br>
But this may be a huge change in React’s internals.

As this is deeply related to this "component-like scope", it’s also impossible to polyfill / re-create on the user world and has to be implemented within React (I may be wrong on this).

This hook will also only be available in **client** code, and not in RSC.

# Alternatives

As mentioned before, `useContextSelector` proposed in https://github.com/reactjs/rfcs/pull/119 is a good substitute proposal. But this proposal is more generic as it can be also used with any kind of state / variable.

# Adoption strategy

As this is a new feature, no need to do a breaking change / introduce a new major / do codemods.<br>
It can be released in a minor version.

# How we teach this

The dependency array makes it really close to already existing hooks like `useMemo` / `useCallback` / `useEffect`.

Also this perfectly fits those already existing hooks as it could be built on top of them, so no new patterns to learn. And the previous best-practices can still be applied. It also follows the same rule of hooks as usual.

For new React developers, it could be taught as a hook to boost performance, like `useMemo`: it should work without, but this can prevent unnecessary re-renders.

The only new paradigm is that as hooks will be defined within the `callback`, we’ll need to teach developers that this doesn’t break the rule of hooks (as those would run kind of like in another component).

# Unresolved questions

I don’t really know.

Commit message:

RFC: useIsolation – add note about concurrent

text/0000-use-isolation.md, after:

- Start Date: 2023-12-13
- RFC PR: (leave this empty)
- React Issue: (leave this empty)

# Summary

This RFC proposes a new hook `useIsolation(() => …)` to allow creating a _sub-hook_ that can compute expensive values in _isolation_ and can memoize its returned value.

# Basic example

Let’s say you have a context that is a bit massive, but you just want to listen to 1 value `foo` in it and only re-render when it changes, you could do something like this:

```jsx
const MyComponent = () => {
  const foo = React.useIsolation(() => {
    const context = React.useContext(CustomHeavyContext);
    return context.foo;
  });
};
```

But this would also work with any kind of state / values:

```jsx
const MyComponent = () => {
  const bar = React.useIsolation(() => {
    const allSearchParams = useSearchParams();
    return allSearchParams.get("bar");
  });
};
```

# Motivation

This topic is mostly for performance reasons. A few of other RFCs are proposing solutions to solve this:

- `useIsolation` in https://github.com/reactjs/rfcs/issues/168,
- `useContextSelector` in https://github.com/reactjs/rfcs/pull/119.

When working with components, you can bail out of re-renders with `React.memo` / `shouldComponentUpdate()`.

And given this tree: `<A><B/></A>`, when `A` changes, `B` may not rerender.<br>
But when working with hooks, if you have 2 hooks `useA` and `useB` (used within `useA`), when `useB` re-renders, there is no way to bail out from its renders in neither `useA`.

This is an issue for large codebases that can share a lot of hooks (without having the ability of auditing all of them).<br>
Or for libraries like `react-router-dom` that expose large objects (the router state) and where users want to only register for changes that matter to them.

# Detailed design

This hook is inspired by both `React.memo` where you can provide a `areEqual` function as a 2nd parameter, and by `useMemo`.

When you want to make a piece of code run in _isolation\*_ from its parent component/hook, you can use `useIsolation`.<br>
This hook takes 2 parameters:

- Using MDN’s notation: `useIsolation(callback, [deps])`
- Using TS’s notation: `useIsolation<T>(callback: () => T, deps?: ReadonlyArray<unknown>)`

\*: this wouldn’t strictly run in isolation, as you may define dependencies to ease the communication between the parent scope and the isolated one.

## Pseudo-code mechanism

The way this would work in pseudo-code is this way:

> [!WARNING]
> I don’t know React internals so I’m going to make some assumptions

1. During the initial mount, call the `callback` within its _parent scope_
2. Create a new internal _call scope_ (like a component)
3. If the `callback` uses hooks like `useState`, `useContext`, etc., bind them to this _call scope_ instead of its parent scope
4. If there are dependencies defined, store then in _internal slots_ (like like with `useMemo` or `useCallback`) saved on the _parent scope_
5. Store the return value of the `callback` in a _internal slot_ in the _parent scope_
6. If there are any updates in any of the hooks defined within the _call scope_ (aka within the `callback`), re-compute the `callback`, and store the return value in same _internal slot_.
7. If there are any updates in the _parent scope_, check if any dependencies have changed (if no dependencies are set, recompute on all updates), re-compute the `callback`, and store the return value in same _internal slot_.

## Details on the design

As this can accept optional dependencies, the question of "what to do if there is an update in the parent component/hook?" should be tackled.

This hook would work like any other hook and follow the rule of hooks. And as it creates a new _call scope_, this doesn’t break the rule of hooks per say (as sub-hooks would not always be called), as the isolated scope would behave like a sub-component.

This hook should only be available in client components, but not in RSCs.

## Code examples

### Without dependencies

```jsx
const MyComponent = () => {
  const [index, setIndex] = React.useState(0);
  const [other, setOther] = React.useState(0);
  const fooWithIndex = React.useIsolation(function isolated() {
    const context = React.useContext(CustomHeavyContext);
    return context.foo + index;
  });
};
```

With this piece of code,

- if `index` gets updated, `isolated()` will have to be re-computed
- if `other` gets updated, `isolated()` will have to be re-computed
- if `CustomHeavyContext` gets updated, `isolated()` will have to be re-computed

### With dependencies

```jsx
const MyComponent = () => {
  const [index, setIndex] = React.useState(0);
  const [other, setOther] = React.useState(0);
  const fooWithIndex = React.useIsolation(
    function isolated() {
      const context = React.useContext(CustomHeavyContext);
      return context.foo + index;
    },
    [index]
  );
};
```

With this piece of code,

- if `index` gets updated, `isolated()` will have to be re-computed
- if `other` gets updated, `isolated()` **won’t** have to be re-computed
- if `CustomHeavyContext` gets updated, `isolated()` will have to be re-computed

# Drawbacks

The base principle of this new hook is to be able to create new _call scope_ (aka component-like scopes).<br>
But this may be a huge change in React’s internals.

As this is deeply related to this "component-like scope", it’s also impossible to polyfill / re-create on the user world and has to be implemented within React (I may be wrong on this).

This hook will also only be available in **client** code, and not in RSC.

# Alternatives

As mentioned before, `useContextSelector` proposed in https://github.com/reactjs/rfcs/pull/119 is a good substitute proposal. But this proposal is more generic as it can be also used with any kind of state / variable.

# Adoption strategy

As this is a new feature, no need to do a breaking change / introduce a new major / do codemods.<br>
It can be released in a minor version.

# How we teach this

The dependency array makes it really close to already existing hooks like `useMemo` / `useCallback` / `useEffect`.

Also this perfectly fits those already existing hooks as it could be built on top of them, so no new patterns to learn. And the previous best-practices can still be applied. It also follows the same rule of hooks as usual.

For new React developers, it could be taught as a hook to boost performance, like `useMemo`: it should work without, but this can prevent unnecessary re-renders.

The only new paradigm is that as hooks will be defined within the `callback`, we’ll need to teach developers that this doesn’t break the rule of hooks (as those would run kind of like in another component).

# Unresolved questions

Is this concurrent-compliant?

Otherwise, I don’t really know.
