text/0000-ref-forwarding.md, before:

- Start Date: 2018-03-07
- RFC PR: (leave this empty)
- React Issue: (leave this empty)

# Summary

Provide an API that enables [`refs`](https://reactjs.org/docs/refs-and-the-dom.html) to be forwarded to a child component.

# Motivation

I recently began contributing to [`react-relay` modern](https://github.com/facebook/relay/tree/master/packages/react-relay/modern) in order to prepare it for the [upcoming React async-rendering feature](https://reactjs.org/blog/2018/03/01/sneak-peek-beyond-react-16.html).

One of the first challenges I encountered was that `react-relay` depends on the legacy, unstable context API, and values passed through legacy `context` aren't accessible in the new, [static `getDerivedStateFromProps` lifecycle](https://github.com/reactjs/rfcs/blob/master/text/0006-static-lifecycle-methods.md#static-getderivedstatefrompropsnextprops-props-prevstate-state-shapestate--null). The long-term plan for `react-relay` is to use the [new and improved contex API](https://github.com/reactjs/rfcs/blob/master/text/0002-new-version-of-context.md) but this can't be done without dropping support for older versions of React- (something `react-relay` may not be able to do yet).

In an effort to work around this, I created a smaller wrapper component to convert the necessary `context` value to a `prop` so that it could be accessed within the static lifecycle:

```js
function injectLegacyRelayContext(Component) {
  function LegacyRelayContextConsumer(props, legacyContext) {
    return <Component {...props} relay={legacyContext.relay} />;
  }

  LegacyRelayContextConsumer.contextTypes = {
    relay: RelayPropTypes.Relay
  };

  return LegacyRelayContextConsumer;
}
```

Unfortunately, this change broke several projects within Facebook that depended on refs to access the inner Relay components.

As I considered this, I became convinced that the new Context API naturally lends itself to similar wrapper components, e.g.:
```js
const ThemeContext = React.createContext("light");

function withTheme(ThemedComponent) {
  return function ThemeContextInjector(props) {
    return (
      <ThemeContext.Consumer>
        {value => <ThemedComponent {...props} theme={value} />}
      </ThemeContext.Consumer>
    );
  };
}
```

Unfortunately, within the current limitations of React, there is no (transparent) way for a 
a `ref` to be attached to the above `ThemedComponent`. Common workarounds typically use a special prop (e.g. `componentRef`) like so:
```js
const ThemeContext = React.createContext("light");

function withTheme(ThemedComponent) {
  return function ThemeContextInjector(props) {
    return (
      <ThemeContext.Consumer>
        {value => (
          <ThemedComponent {...props} ref={props.componentRef} theme={value} />
        )}
      </ThemeContext.Consumer>
    );
  };
}
```

This convention varies from project to project, and requires users of the `ThemedComponent` to be aware of the fact that it's wrapped by a higher-order component. This detail should not be important. It should be possible to use a standard React `ref` that the `ThemeContextInjector` (in this case) could forward to its child `ThemedComponent`.

The idea of `ref`-forwarding [is not new](https://github.com/facebook/react/issues/4213), but the new context and other efforts like [`create-subscription`](https://github.com/facebook/react/pull/12325) greatly increase the importance of this feature.

# Basic example

The Relay `context` injector component ([shown above](#motivation)) could use the ref-forwarding API proposed by this RFC as follows:

```js
function injectLegacyRelayContext(Component) {
  function LegacyRelayContextConsumer(props, legacyContext) {
    return (
      <Component
        {...props}
        relay={legacyContext.relay}
        ref={props.forwardedRef}
      />
    );
  }

  LegacyRelayContextConsumer.contextTypes = {
    relay: RelayPropTypes.Relay
  };

  // Create a special React component type that exposes the external 'ref'.
  // This lets us pass it along as a regular prop,
  // And attach it as a regular React 'ref' on the component we choose.
  return Ref.forward((props, ref) => (
    <LegacyRelayContextConsumer {...props} forwardedRef={ref} />
  ));
}
```

# Detailed design

Coming soon...

# Drawbacks

Coming soon...

# Alternatives

Coming soon...

# Adoption strategy

Coming soon...

# How we teach this

Coming soon...

# Unresolved questions

None presently.

Commit message:

Added Drawbacks and Alternatives sections

text/0000-ref-forwarding.md, after:

- Start Date: 2018-03-07
- RFC PR: (leave this empty)
- React Issue: (leave this empty)

# Summary

Provide an API that enables [`refs`](https://reactjs.org/docs/refs-and-the-dom.html) to be forwarded to a child component.

# Motivation

I recently began contributing to [`react-relay` modern](https://github.com/facebook/relay/tree/master/packages/react-relay/modern) in order to prepare it for the [upcoming React async-rendering feature](https://reactjs.org/blog/2018/03/01/sneak-peek-beyond-react-16.html).

One of the first challenges I encountered was that `react-relay` depends on the legacy, unstable context API, and values passed through legacy `context` aren't accessible in the new, [static `getDerivedStateFromProps` lifecycle](https://github.com/reactjs/rfcs/blob/master/text/0006-static-lifecycle-methods.md#static-getderivedstatefrompropsnextprops-props-prevstate-state-shapestate--null). The long-term plan for `react-relay` is to use the [new and improved contex API](https://github.com/reactjs/rfcs/blob/master/text/0002-new-version-of-context.md) but this can't be done without dropping support for older versions of React- (something `react-relay` may not be able to do yet).

In an effort to work around this, I created a smaller wrapper component to convert the necessary `context` value to a `prop` so that it could be accessed within the static lifecycle:

```js
function injectLegacyRelayContext(Component) {
  function LegacyRelayContextConsumer(props, legacyContext) {
    return <Component {...props} relay={legacyContext.relay} />;
  }

  LegacyRelayContextConsumer.contextTypes = {
    relay: RelayPropTypes.Relay
  };

  return LegacyRelayContextConsumer;
}
```

Unfortunately, this change broke several projects within Facebook that depended on refs to access the inner Relay components.

As I considered this, I became convinced that the new Context API naturally lends itself to similar wrapper components, e.g.:
```js
const ThemeContext = React.createContext("light");

function withTheme(ThemedComponent) {
  return function ThemeContextInjector(props) {
    return (
      <ThemeContext.Consumer>
        {value => <ThemedComponent {...props} theme={value} />}
      </ThemeContext.Consumer>
    );
  };
}
```

Unfortunately, within the current limitations of React, there is no (transparent) way for a 
a `ref` to be attached to the above `ThemedComponent`. Common workarounds typically use a special prop (e.g. `componentRef`) like so:
```js
const ThemeContext = React.createContext("light");

function withTheme(ThemedComponent) {
  return function ThemeContextInjector(props) {
    return (
      <ThemeContext.Consumer>
        {value => (
          <ThemedComponent {...props} ref={props.componentRef} theme={value} />
        )}
      </ThemeContext.Consumer>
    );
  };
}
```

This convention varies from project to project, and requires users of the `ThemedComponent` to be aware of the fact that it's wrapped by a higher-order component. This detail should not be important. It should be possible to use a standard React `ref` that the `ThemeContextInjector` (in this case) could forward to its child `ThemedComponent`.

The idea of `ref`-forwarding [is not new](https://github.com/facebook/react/issues/4213), but the new context and other efforts like [`create-subscription`](https://github.com/facebook/react/pull/12325) greatly increase the importance of this feature.

# Basic example

The Relay `context` injector component ([shown above](#motivation)) could use the ref-forwarding API proposed by this RFC as follows:

```js
function injectLegacyRelayContext(Component) {
  function LegacyRelayContextConsumer(props, legacyContext) {
    return (
      <Component
        {...props}
        relay={legacyContext.relay}
        ref={props.forwardedRef}
      />
    );
  }

  LegacyRelayContextConsumer.contextTypes = {
    relay: RelayPropTypes.Relay
  };

  // Create a special React component type that exposes the external 'ref'.
  // This lets us pass it along as a regular prop,
  // And attach it as a regular React 'ref' on the component we choose.
  return Ref.forward((props, ref) => (
    <LegacyRelayContextConsumer {...props} forwardedRef={ref} />
  ));
}
```

# Detailed design

Coming soon...

# Drawbacks

This API increases the surface area of React slightly, and may complicate compatibility efforts for react-like frameworks (e.g. `preact-compat`). I believe this is worth the benefit of having a standardized, transparent way to forward refs.

# Alternatives

Add a new class method, e.g. `getPublicInstance` or `getWrappedInstance` that coudl be used to get the inner ref. (Drawbacks listed [here](https://github.com/facebook/react/issues/4213#issuecomment-115019321).)

Specify a ["high-level" flag on the component](https://github.com/facebook/react/issues/4213#issuecomment-115048260) that instructs React to forward refs past it.

[Automatically forward refs for stateless functions components](https://github.com/facebook/react/issues/4213#issuecomment-115051991). (React currently warns if you try attaching a `ref` to a functional component, since there is no backing instance to reference.) I don't believe this approach would be sufficient, since wrapper components often require class lifecycles.

# Adoption strategy

Coming soon...

# How we teach this

Coming soon...

# Unresolved questions

None presently.
